

--- PAGE 13 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
13
2 Architecture Overview
2.1 Architectural Block Diagram
Figure 2 depicts the GEM’s top-level block diagram.
Figure 2: Top-Level Block Diagram
GEM implements a 10/100/1000Mbps Ethernet MAC compatible with the IEEE 802.3 standard. GEM can operate in either 
half or full duplex. The network configuration register is used to select the speed, duplex mode, and interface type (MII, 
RMII, GMII, RGMII or SGMII).
GEM comprises the following constituent components:
• MAC controlling transmit, receive, address checking and loopback
• Configuration registers (REG_TOP) providing control and status registers, statistics registers and synchronization logic
• Physical Coding Sublayer (PCS) controlling 8B/10B encode/decode, PCS transmit, PCS receive, and PCS auto-nego-
tiation
• Direct Memory Access (DMA_TOP) controlling DMA transmit, DMA receive and AHB/AXI arbitration logic
• Timestamp Unit (TSU) to calculate the IEEE 1588 timer values and containing the real time clock
• Automotive Safety Features (ASF)


--- PAGE 14 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
14
In system applications where no DMA operation is required, the DMA_TOP module can be removed using a configuration 
option and an external FIFO interface used to incorporate GEM into a SoC environment. GEM can also be configured to 
expose the FIFO interface when DMA_TOP is present so that either the FIFO or the DMA interface of the GEM instance 
may be used. GEM’s PCS module may also be removed using a configuration option.
2.2 Top-Level Blocks
2.2.1 MAC
The MAC transmit block takes data from the external FIFO interface, adds preamble and, if necessary, pad and frame 
check sequence (FCS). Both half-duplex and full-duplex Ethernet modes of operation are supported. When operating in 
half-duplex mode, the MAC transmit block generates data according to the carrier sense multiple access with collision 
detect (CSMA/CD) protocol. The start of transmission is deferred if carrier sense (crs) is active. If collision (col) becomes 
active during transmission, a jam sequence is asserted and the transmission is re-tried after a random back off. The crs and 
col signals have no effect in full-duplex mode. Refer to Section 6.1.6 MAC Transmit Block on page 89 for more details.
The MAC receive block checks for valid preamble, FCS, alignment and length, and presents received frames to the MAC 
address checking block and external FIFO interface. Software can configure GEM to receive jumbo frames up to 16,383 
bytes. It can optionally strip FCS from the received frame prior to transfer to the external FIFO interface. Refer to 
Section 6.1.8 MAC Receive Block on page 92 for more details.
The address checker recognizes a configurable number of maskable source or destination specific 48-bit addresses, can 
recognize four different type ID values, and contains a 64-bit hash register for matching multicast and unicast addresses as 
required. It can recognize the broadcast address of all ones, copy all frames and act on external address matching signals. 
The MAC can also reject all frames that are not VLAN tagged and recognize Wake-on-LAN events. Address comparison 
against individual bits of Specific Address Register 1 can be masked by means of the Specific Address Mask Register. All 
other specific address filters are byte maskable. Refer to Section 6.1.9 MAC Filtering Block on page 93 for more details.
The MAC receive block supports offloading of IP, TCP, and UDP checksum calculations (both IPv4 and IPv6 packet types 
supported), and can automatically discard frames with bad checksum.
The MAC receive block can be set up to identify 802.1CB streams and automatically eliminate duplicate frames. Statistics 
are provided to report counts of rogue and out-of-order frames, latent errors, and timer reset events.
2.2.2 Physical Coding Sublayer (PCS)
A PCS is incorporated for 1000BASE-X operation and provides a configurable interface to the PMA layer. A PCS transmit 
module and 8B/10B encoder form the transmit path, and a PCS receiver and two 8B/10B decoders form the receive path, 
which is expanded into 16 bits to simplify clocking. Auto-negotiation is also provided for network configuration. The PMA 
interface may be configured to be 10 or 20-bits and appropriate gearboxes for data width conversion will be automatically 
instantiated.
The PCS can be configured through the network configuration register to support an SGMII interface between the MAC and 
an external PHY. For a complete SGMII solution, a SerDes hard macro is also required.
2.2.3 Configuration Registers (REG_TOP)
Control registers drive the management data input/output (MDIO) interface, set up DMA activity, start frame transmission 
and select modes of operation such as full-duplex, half-duplex, and 10/100/1000Mbps operation. The register interface is 
compatible with AMBA APB interface standard, version 2.0. 
The statistics register block contains registers for counting various types of event associated with transmit and receive 
operation. These registers, along with the status words stored in the receive buffer list, enable software to generate net-
work management statistics compatible with IEEE 802.3 Clause 30.


--- PAGE 15 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
15
2.2.4 Direct Memory Access (DMA_TOP)
The DMA may be configured in either a low-latency buffering mode using internal transmit and receive FIFOs or a packet 
buffering mode using external memories.
Datapath bus widths of 32, 64, and 128 bit are supported at all data rates (Note that 128-bit datapath is not available when 
an AHB interface is selected) although system designers should carefully consider the bandwidth requirements of the 
external datapath being used — either external FIFO interface or AMBA AHB/AXI interface. The DMA block connects to 
external memory through its AMBA AHB or AXI bus interface. The DMA gathers data to be transmitted from transmit data 
buffers in system memory and scatters received data to receive data buffers in system memory. Receive data is not sent to 
memory until the address checking logic has determined that the frame should be copied. 
Receive or transmit frames are stored in one or more DMA buffers. The receive buffer size is programmable between 64 
bytes and 16KB. Transmit buffers range in length between 1 and 16,383 bytes, and up to 128 buffers are permitted per 
frame. The DMA block manages the transmit and receive frame buffer queues.
For chip architecture where DMA is not required, GEM is supplied with an external transmit and receive external FIFO 
interface, thus simplifying design complexity and reducing gate count.
Note the DMA block does not use AMBA AHB split and retry operations. 
2.2.5 Timestamp Unit (TSU)
The IEEE 1588 timestamp unit (TSU) is a timer implemented as a 102-bit register, with the bits designated as follows:
•  The 48 upper bits count seconds 
• The next 30 lower bits count nanoseconds 
• The lowest 24 bits count sub nanoseconds
• The 54 lower bits roll over when they have counted to one second
The timer increments by a programmable period (to approximately 59.6 attosecond resolution – 5.96E-17) with each PCLK 
or TSU_CLK period and can also be adjusted in 1ns resolution (incremented or decremented) through APB register 
accesses.
An optional external TSU port can be built into the design using a configuration option. When the external TSU port is avail-
able, the selection between internal or external TSU is performed using a programmable register. The default selection is 
internal TSU. The external port is 94-bits wide, mapping to the most significant bits of the internal TSU count as defined 
above.
2.2.6 Automotive Safety Features
The following automotive safety components are included:
• Fault Logging and Reporting module
• SRAM protection wrappers
• Parity generators and checkers
• Generic transaction timeout monitor
2.2.6.1 Functional Safety
A functional safety manual is provided as one of the deliverables. A representative configuration of the GEM core has 
undergone Failure Modes, Effects, and Diagnostic Analysis (FMEDA) and achieved ASIL-B ready certification from SGS-
TUV.
The following configuration was used for the FMEDA analysis:
• No PCS
• No RGMII


--- PAGE 16 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
16
• Internal loopback
• Statistics registers included
• Four specific address filters
• 64-bit data bus width
• 32-bit addressing
• AXI host interface
• Dual-port SRAM (16KB each for transmit and receive)
• Three priority queues
• No cut-through
• No LSO
• Four type 1 screener registers
• Four type 2 screener registers
• 802.1Qav included
• 802.1Qbv included
• Twelve screener 2 compare registers
• TSU included
• tsu_clk included
The provided safety manual should be referenced and the suggested external safety mechanisms should be, where possi-
ble, implemented in order to meet the required ASIL safety level.
