

--- PAGE 122 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
122
GEM signals completion of auto-negotiation through the PCS auto-negotiation complete interrupt, on bit 16 of the interrupt 
status register. Auto-negotiation completion is also indicated by bit 5 of the PCS status register.
The PCS resolves the GEM and link partner’s abilities and reports the result in the network status register. Pause transmit 
and receive resolution are reported in accordance with Table 37-4 in the IEEE 802.3 specification. If full-duplex capability is 
resolved the duplex resolution bit is set high in the network status register. If half-duplex capability is resolved the duplex 
resolution bit will be low. If GEM and its link partner cannot resolve a common duplex capability, the duplex resolution bit is 
not set and link will be indicated as being down (bit 2 in the PCS status register and bit 0 in the network status register will 
both be zero) when auto-negotiation completes. Although GEM reports the auto-negotiation resolution, it does not 
automatically reconfigure its duplex and pause states. So it is necessary for management software to set the duplex bit in 
the network configuration register if it reads the duplex resolution bit as being set in the network status register.
6.1.20.4 PCS Collision Detect and Carrier Sense
The PCS provides both the carrier sense and collision signals for use by the MAC sub-layer when the TBI is active.
CRS (Carrier Sense) is generated by the following conditions:
• The receiver has decoded a start of packet/end of packet or receive carrier extension is active. This state is indicated 
internally to the PCS by CRS receive.
• tx_en is active, or carrier extension is active for transmit.
The collision signal is generated whenever the PCS is requested to transmit an Ethernet frame at a time coincident with the 
crs receive signal being active. The col signal remains active for the duration of the collision. Both crs and col are asserted, 
regardless of whether the PCS is operating in half-duplex or full-duplex mode.
6.1.20.5 Link Status
The PCS link status is indicated on: [introduced bullets]
• Bit 2 of the PCS status register
• Bit 0 of the network status register and
• Bit 9 of the interrupt status register
An interrupt is generated each time the PCS link status changes (i.e. link good or link bad).
When auto-negotiation is disabled, the link status value is determined by whether or not the PCS is in a synchronized state. 
When auto-negotiation is enabled, the link status value is determined by successful completion of auto-negotiation.
6.2 Low-Power Features
GEM provides Energy-Efficient Ethernet (EEE) support.
IEEE 802.3az adds support for energy efficiency to Ethernet. These are the key features of 802.3az:
• Allows a system’s transmit path to enter a low power mode if there is nothing to transmit
• Allows a PHY to detect whether its link partner’s transmit path is in low-power mode, therefore allowing the system’s 
receive path to enter low-power mode
• Link remains up during lower power mode and no frames are dropped
• Asymmetric, one direction can be in low-power mode while the other is transmitting normally
• LPI (Low Power Idle) signaling is used to control entry and exit to and from low power modes
• LPI signaling can only take place if both sides have indicated support for it through auto-negotiation
802.3az operation:
• Low-power control is done at the MII (reconciliation sublayer).


--- PAGE 123 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
123
• As an architectural convenience in writing the IEEE 802.3az, it is assumed that transmission is deferred by asserting 
carrier sense; in practice it is not done this way. This system will know when it has nothing to transmit and only enter 
low-power mode when it is not transmitting.
• LPI should not be requested unless the link has been up for at least one second
• LPI is signaled on the GMII transmit path by asserting 0x01 on txd with tx_en low and tx_er high
• A PHY, on seeing LPI requested on the MII, sends the sleep signal before going quiet. After going quiet, it periodically 
emits refresh signals.
• The sleep, quiet, and refresh periods are defined in Table 78-2 of IEEE 802.3az. For 1000BASE-X, the sleep period is 
20 microseconds, the quiet period 2.5 milliseconds, and the refresh period 20 microseconds.
• 1000BASE-X is required to go quiet after sleep is signaled. The easiest way to do this is to write to a control register to 
disable transmit in the SerDes.
• SGMII is not part of IEEE 802.3az and should not go quiet after sleep is signaled.
• LPI mode ends by transmitting normal idle for the wake time. There is a default time for this but it can be adjusted in 
software using the Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP) described in Clause 79 of 802.3az.
• LPI is indicated at the receive side when sleep and refresh signaling has been detected.
6.2.1 LPI Operation in Cadence IP
It is best to use firmware to control LPI. LPI operation is something that happens at the system level. Firmware gives 
maximum control and flexibility of operation. LPI operation is straightforward and firmware should be capable of responding 
within the required timeframes.
Auto-negotiation
• Indicate EEE capability using next page auto-negotiation
For the transmit path:
• If the link has been up for 1 second and there is nothing being transmitted, write to the LPI bit in network control register
• If connected to 1000BASE-T PHY using SGMII or RGMII, there is nothing more to do.
• If connected to a backplane using a 1000BASE-KX PHY, use firmware to periodically disable the SerDes transmit path. 
(Write to bit 1.160.0 for 1000BASE-KX.) 
• Wake up by clearing the LPI bit in the network control register
From GEM 1p07 release onwards, the LPI bit is ORed into the transmit pause functionality so transmission will pause as 
long as tx_lpi_en is active. This allows queuing of new transmit frames while the LPI signal is active. The 16-bit Tw_sys_tx 
time register at 0x060 holds the system wake time. After tx_lpi_en is de-asserted transmission will continue to be paused 
while the value in the tw_sys_tx_time counts done fixed time periods. The time period counted down is: 
• 64ns for gigabit operation
• 320ns for 100M operation
• 3200ns for 10M operation
In other words 8 tx_clk periods. So for example, if tw_sys_tx_time is set to 8 in 100M mode, transmission will be paused for 
8 * 320 ns = 25.6 microseconds after deassertion of tx_lpi_en.
For the receive path:
• Wait for an interrupt to indicate that LPI has been received
• Disable relevant parts of the receive path if desired but keep the PCS and SerDes active
• Wait for an interrupt to indicate that regular idle has been received and then re-enable the receive path


--- PAGE 124 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
124
6.3 Design For Test (DFT) Features
Setting the retry_text bit in the network configuration register aids directed functional testing by speeding up the collision 
back-off algorithm, the pause counter, and the frer timeout.
6.4 Automotive Safety Features (ASF)
In order to improve reliability of the GEM, a number of internal detection mechanisms are implemented to detect when 
there is abnormal behavior.
6.4.1 IP Fault Logging and Reporting
The IP Fault Logging and Reporting module provides a user interface for accessing from memory location 0x0e00, Active 
Safety fault information. 
The fault detection capability covers the following:
• Lockup detection
• Mapping of existing internally detected faults to fault logging
• Mapping of protocol error detection to fault logging, e.g. various RX errors which would normally cause packet to be 
dropped with only update to statistics, these are  also be reported as protocol errors that the user can mask.
• Parity errors on the datapath
• Parity errors with the control registers
• Error detection and correction on the SRAMs
The IP Fault Logging and Reporting module presents a consistent view of the ASF status.
Figure 22 shows a basic block diagram for this module.


--- PAGE 125 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
125
Figure 22: IP Fault Logging and Reporting Block Diagram
The module defines seven different ASF functions, each of which has its own set of fault and status inputs. If a specific ASF 
function is not implemented within the IP, the inputs related to that function should be tied to 0 and the outputs left 
unconnected. Parameterization of this module will ensure that the relevant interrupt bits do not exist and access to the 
associated status registers will result in asf_err being asserted which you may map to host error signaling where 
appropriate (e.g. Perr).
6.4.2 Configuration/Control and Status Registers Protection
When ASF is configured, all configuration, control, and status registers may be protected either by parity or duplication. The 
only registers that are not protected are statistics registers, i.e. everything in gem_reg_stats.
Parity should be either sourced from the host as the primary input pwdata_par if the host has parity generation capabilities, 
otherwise a single parity generator will be instanced to generate parity based on pwdata. This parity is stored alongside all 
registers that are to be parity protected.
The stored parity is checked alongside the stored data every clock cycle for errors.
The following registers are protected by duplication as they involve interaction with the hardware or complex manipulation 
preventing parity alone from being a comprehensive fault protection method
• Network Control
• Transmit Status
• Receive Status
• All interrupt registers
• PHY Management registers and state machine
• Part of transmit scheduler registers


--- PAGE 126 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
126
Each sub-module also generates a fault signal associated with that module to indicate when a fault has been detected. 
These signals are combined with ‘OR’ to generate overall fault indication to the Fault Logging and Reporting module [01].
Fault detection is active every clock cycle.
If the host interface requires parity, the prdata_par is generated using the parity generator modules directly from prdata 
which should have sufficiently protected source registers.
Parity generation and checking is expected to use the new reuse modules developed as part of [01] and will need to be 
checked out through an SVN extern definition to an appropriate directory.


--- PAGE 127 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
127
7 How to Set Up the IP
7.1 SRAM Protection
The IP can be configured to add Error Correcting Code (ECC) protection to SRAM data such that corruption within the 
SRAM may be detected and possibly corrected. The protection code used is capable of correcting 1-bit and detecting 2-bit 
errors.
When this configuration option is selected, the dataports of the SRAM are widened to include the additional correction 
codes. The data width is extended by 7, 8, or 16 bits depending on whether the datapath is configured to be 32, 64, or 128 
bits respectively.
For uncorrectable errors, the address associated with the error is logged in either the txdpram_non_crr_err_addr or 
rxdpram_non_crr_err_addr register and is not updated again until the software reads this register.
The SRAM protection component is instantiated if the Data/Address Path protection feature is enabled. Otherwise, the 
existing SRAM interface signals go direct to the top level I/O.
If Data/Address Path protection is enabled, the SRAM protection can be configured to support either parity or ECC 
protection.
If ECC protection is selected, the parity will be checked and terminated at the SRAM ECC boundary and parity will be 
regenerated on the read side after the SRAM ECC boundary.
7.2 Transaction Timeout Monitoring
Host side interfaces have the option of transaction timeout monitoring to detect potential lockup conditions in the host. 
There is one transaction timeout monitor instantiated on each AXI channel. The timeout value is controlled by the Fault 
Logging and Reporting module and each fault condition is routed to a separate input of the asf_trans_to_fault bus of that 
module.
7.3 Datapath and Address Path Parity Protection
When the design is configured for datapath parity protection, additional parity generators and checkers are used to ensure 
integrity of the main datapaths through the design. If this option is selected but the above ECC protection (Section 7.1  
SRAM Protection) is not, then the SRAM I/O are parity protected with no correction capability. This causes the SRAM 
datawidth to widen by 4, 8, or 16 bits depending on whether the datapath is configured to be 32, 64, or 128 bits respectively.
When this configuration option is enabled, the main datapaths of GEM have parity protection added and wherever possible 
this is maintained for end to end protection.
Note: Similar to the CSR protection scheme, parity is generated/checked at the host interface depending on the option of 
gem_asf_host_par.
The following dataflow points will need protection:
7.3.1 Transmit Datapath
Parity for transmit data originates from either the host if gem_asf_dma_par is defined, otherwise a parity generator is 
instanced to generate an internal parity from the DMA read data. As the entire DMA datapath operates on a multiple of 
bytes, this parity can be easily maintained and should not need to be regenerated at any point except for TCP checksum 
generationand timestamp insertion.


--- PAGE 128 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
128
In the MAC, the parity is maintained up to the point of transmission on the GMII where it is checked. If the interface is using 
nibbles, then the parity will be checked every second clock cycle. 
7.3.2 Transmit Descriptor Writeback Data
The writeback information, including the address for the writeback has parity protection tagged along to ensure this data is 
properly protected. 
7.3.3 Receive Datapath
Parity is generated in the MAC RX to match the receive data. This is done at the point where the receive data has been 
gathered to 16-bit data words.
This parity is maintained all way to the DMA write port.
7.3.4 Receive Descriptor Writeback Data
The writeback information including the address for the writeback has parity protection tagged along to ensure this data is 
properly protected.
7.3.5 Address Path Protection
For both transmit and receive, the starting buffer address originates from a descriptor read which already has parity data. 
This parity is maintained along with the address information and output to the host for the first access of the data buffer. 
Subsequent accesses will be based on an increment of this starting address and parity will need to be regenerated for 
these following addresses. 
7.4 IP Integrity Protection
7.4.1 TSU Protection Enhancement
The timestamp unit is responsible for generating the time value used for the IEEE 802.1AS protocol. The value of this is 
critical to ensure that packets are timestamped correctly. To protect against any faults within this timer, the TSU module is 
duplicated with the Verilog define gem_protect_tsu is defined. The timer output of these two modules are compared every 
cycle to ensure the values are identical. If any fault is detected, this is signaled as an interrupt.
If the datapath parity protection configuration option is selected, the timestamp value generated by the TSU unit is also 
parity protected and checked wherever it is used to ensure that the value used and logged is valid. If a fault occurs in any of 
the timestamp bits, then an interrupt is signaled.
TSU duplication protection has the following features:
• ALL outputs are compared for mismatches
• Parity generation is added to the TSU module and this parity is maintained and stored along with the timer value. The 
parity does not require regenerating. Parity checks are performed at the following points:
• TX datapath endpoint at GMII
• Registers. There are several paths that eventually end at the registers, the parity should be stored along with the 
timer value and will be checked when the host reads the relevant status registers. If CSR protection is not config-
ured, then the parity is not stored in the registers but it will be checked at the point where the timer value is stored.
• FIFO interface, this will be a check point
• DMA. The parity is maintained as far as possible into the DMA, this should be only used for the writeback data so 
should form part of the writeback data parity which should be checked at the hand-off interface to the SRAM wrap-
pers.
• Supports external timer input mode and assumes that if datapath parity protection is enabled then this external TSU 
source will also supply parity input


--- PAGE 129 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
129
7.4.2 Optional Duplication Protection of Transmit Scheduling
The user may optionally duplicate all the transmit scheduling functions:
• Transmit Scheduler (including CBS traffic shaper)
• EnST function
Both these features are instantiated within gem_tx_fifo_if so new option is to allow duplication of this entire module and 
sub-hierarchy.
This feature adds significant area and is expected to only be used by customers who require guaranteed bandwidth alloca-
tion characteristics.
For protection against total failure of these functions resulting in no packets being transmitted, this would be detected by 
the lockup detection features.
The fault detection will operate every cycle comparing all the outputs of the two modules.
7.5 Lockup Detection
A simple lockup detection mechanism is included in all configurations of the controller IP. This mechanism may be used to 
detect abnormal behaviour of the controller where packets do not pass through the datapath as expected within a program-
mable time frame. The lockup time is controlled by a number of registers including a ‘prescaler’ register which is common 
for all the lockup mechanisms and allows the actual lockup timers to be smaller in size.
There are four separate lockup detection points defined in the following sections:
7.5.1 DMA Transmit Lockup Detection
A DMA transmit lockup detection module is instantiated once for each configured queue in the design and covers two 
detection points:
1. Timeout detection from point of ‘start’ trigger (hardware or software start) until a complete packet has been written into 
the SRAM and cleared for any of the following conditions: 
• Packet fully written into SRAM for this queue. 
• A ‘used bit read’ detected for this queue. 
• A flush condition has occurred in the DMA. 
2. Count number of packets in the SRAM, this is incremented each time a full packet has been written into the SRAM and 
decremented each time a full packet has been transferred to the MAC. A timer is started whenever this count is non-zero 
and is reset each time the count is decremented. A separate software controlled enable is provided for each queue such 
that the timer is not started unless the queue specific timer is enabled. This allows for cases where a fixed priority sched-
uling scheme is used whereby the software knows a large number of high priority packets will be transmitted which 
would prevent lower priority queues from transmitting.
This lockup mechanism does not support the following features and should not be enabled if any of these are enabled:
• Cut-thru mode
• Half-duplex mode
• Large Send Offload
There is a single register for this timeout value and takes into account the prescaler value and is shared by all DMA lockup 
detection mechanisms (both TX and RX).
7.5.2 MAC Transmit Lockup Detection
This lockup detection mechanism continues on from the end point of the DMA Transmit Lockup Detection and counts the 
time from the end of packet on the MAC internal FIFO interface to the end of packet output from the MII bridge after the 
optional IEEE 802.3br MMSL. The result of this is that for the case of the pMAC, the programmed lockup detection time 


--- PAGE 130 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
130
should be set high enough to account for potential pre-emption by the eMAC. There is a single dedicated register for this 
timeout value and takes into account the prescaler value.
7.5.3 MAC Receive Lockup Detection
A generic lockup detection mechanism is available for the MAC RX and relies on the system being set up to have a known 
maximum packet interval. A timeout is triggered if a good (valid packet passing all filtering checks) is not received periodi-
cally within the programmed timeout time. There is a single dedicated register for this timeout value and takes into account 
the prescaler value.
7.5.4 DMA Receive Lockup Detection
A single DMA receive lockup detection module is instantiated (this is not per queue) and counts the number of packets in 
the receive SRAM. The packet count is incremented when a good ‘end of packet’ is written by the MAC RX and overflow is 
not signaled. The packet count is decremented on either DMA packet complete indication or a packet has been flushed 
from the SRAM due to resource error. A timer is started whenever this count is non-zero and is reset each time the count is 
decremented.
This lockup mechanism does not support the following features and should not be enabled if any of these are enabled:
• Cut-thru mode
• Receive Side Coalescing
7.5.5 Lockup Recovery Mechanism
GEM can be configured to automatically disable the transmit and receive datapath circuits in the event that a lockup is 
detected. This will ensure that the design is quickly forced into a quiescent state to prevent possible further corruption of the 
main interfaces.
As the system integrator, it is your responsibility to ensure that the overall system where this IP is used is also transitioned 
into the appropriate fault-detected state and/or appropriate recovery procedures are taken.
7.6 Error Handling
7.6.1 IP Protocol Checking
GEM contains existing checks for the Ethernet protocol and these normally result in increment of various statistics 
registers.
These are also routed to the IP Fault Logging and Reporting module to allow the user to be optionally notified and take 
action on these events.
The following are items that can be logged:
• Collision
• Too many retries
• Underflow
• RX length error
• RX too long
• RX jabber error
• RX CRC error
• RX too short
• RX symbol error
• RX align error


--- PAGE 131 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
131
• RX checksum error
Default for the protocol masking is that these are all masked as the IP is designed to be able to deal with these errors. You 
may optionally want to unmask these to be notified of these events happening and possibly take action if too many such 
errors occur.
7.6.2 Fatal and Non-Fatal Interrupts Classification
When the design is configured to include the ASF features, two new interrupt pins called asf_int_fatal and asf_int_nonfatal 
provide interrupt event notification specific to ASF events and this is configurable through the asf_int_mask register.
In addition, a new register asf_fatal_nonfatal_select is provided to allow routing a number of different interrupt sources to 
either of these interrupts.
