

--- PAGE 89 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
89
Figure 16 shows a frame on the external FIFO interface (MAC receive) with frame error.
Figure 16: External FIFO Interface Timing (6) 
6.1.4 Additional Low-Latency TX FIFO Interface for DMA Configurations
When the design is configured to include the SRAM-based packet buffer DMA, it is possible for you to additionally add an 
extra low latency FIFO TX host interface to inject high priority fixed latency traffic directly into the transmit path of the MAC 
bypassing the DMA altogether. This additional TX FIFO host interface is optionally included by defining `gem_tx_add_fifo_if 
verilog define. Packets that are injected into the MAC via the low latency FIFO interface have the same latency as the 
external fifo_interface mode, plus one tx_clk clock cycle, when no DMA frame is being sent or from the end of the current 
DMA frame ends, and is useful if particular packets needing a fixed transmit latency are required. DMA and low latency TX 
frames are dynamically arbitrated with low latency TX FIFO interface frames being highest priority. If a frame from the DMA 
is being transmitted to the MAC, it will complete before the Low Latency TX frame is sent but following DMA frames will be 
delayed if required.
As there is no RX FIFO interface in this mode, all received frames are passed to the RX DMA.
When using the additional low latency transmit fifo the following restrictions apply:
• Half duplex is not supported
• No register status updating for packet complete for fifo frames
Underflow errors that occur when packets are being fetched via the external FIFO interface are not reported in the status 
registers or interrupts. Underflow status will still get reported via the FIFO interface outputs.
6.1.5 Host Interface Soft Select Configuration External FIFO / DMA Interfaces
The design can be configured to have both external FIFO interface and the SRAM packet buffer DMA interfaces. This can 
optionally be built by defining `define gem_host_if_soft_select.
In this mode, either the external FIFO interface or the DMA interface can be selected. They cannot be used together. The 
interface selection is a static programming option that should be setup before enabling the RX and TX paths.
6.1.6 MAC Transmit Block
The MAC transmitter operates in either half duplex or full duplex, and transmits frames in accordance with the Ethernet 
IEEE 802.3 standard. In half-duplex mode, the CSMA/CD protocol of the IEEE 802.3 specification is followed.
A small input buffer receives data through the external FIFO interface (from either the DMA module or external to the IP 
Core) which, depending on the dma_bus_width control bits in the network configuration register, will extract data in either 
32, 64, or 128-bit form. All subsequent processing prior to the final output is performed in bytes.
rx_w_clk
rx_w_wr
rx_w_data
rx_w_sop
rx_w_eop
rx_w_mod
rx_w_err
D0
D1
D2
X
0
X
X


--- PAGE 90 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
90
Transmit data can be output using the GMII/MII interface or through the TBI.
If the TBI is selected (gigabit and SGMII modes only), then the MAC transmitter passes 8-bit data to the PCS for further 
processing prior to output on the TBI. In 10 and 100Mbps SGMII mode, the MAC is clocked slower than the PCS which has 
the effect of the PCS sampling the same 8-bit data 10 or 100 times.
Frame assembly starts by adding preamble and the start frame delimiter. Data is taken from the transmit FIFO interface a 
word at a time. When GEM is configured for gigabit operation, the data output to the PHY uses all 8 bits of the txd[7:0] 
output. In 10/100M mode, transmit data to the PHY is nibble wide and least significant nibble first using txd[3:0] with txd[7:4] 
tied to logic 0.
If necessary, padding is added to take the frame length to 60 bytes. CRC is calculated using an order 32-bit polynomial. 
This is inverted and appended to the end of the frame taking the frame length to a minimum of 64 bytes. If the no CRC bit 
is set in the second word of the last buffer descriptor of a transmit frame, neither pad nor CRC are appended. The no CRC 
bit can also be set through the FIFO interface.
In full-duplex mode (at all data rates), frames are transmitted immediately. Back to back frames are transmitted at least 96 
bit times apart to guarantee the interframe gap.
In half-duplex mode, the transmitter checks carrier sense. If asserted, the transmitter waits for the signal to become 
inactive, and then starts transmission after the interframe gap of 96 bit times. If the collision signal is asserted during 
transmission, the transmitter will transmit a jam sequence of 32 bits taken from the data register and then retry 
transmission after the back-off time has elapsed. If the collision occurs during either the preamble or start frame delimiter 
(SFD), then these fields will be completed prior to generation of the jam sequence.
The back-off time is based on an XOR of the 10 least significant bits of the data coming from the transmit FIFO interface 
and a 10-bit pseudo random number generator. The number of bits used depends on the number of collisions seen. After 
the first collision 1 bit is used, then the second 2 bits, and so on up to the maximum of 10 bits. All 10 bits are used above 
ten collisions. An error will be indicated and no further attempts will be made if 16 consecutive attempts cause collision. 
This operation is compliant with the description in Clause 4.2.3.2.5 of the IEEE 802.3 standard, which refers to the 
truncated binary exponential back-off algorithm.
In 10/100M mode, both collisions and late collisions are treated identically, and back off and retry will be performed up to 16 
times. When operating in gigabit mode, late collisions are treated as an exception and transmission is aborted, without 
retry. This condition is reported in the transmit buffer descriptor word 1 (late collision, bit 26) and also in the transmit status 
register (late collision, bit 7). An interrupt can also be generated (if enabled) when this exception occurs, and bit 5 in the 
interrupt status register will be set.
In all modes of operation, if the transmit DMA underruns, a bad CRC is automatically appended using the same 
mechanism as jam insertion and the tx_er signal is asserted. For a properly configured system, this should never happen, 
and also it is impossible if configured to use the DMA with packet buffers as the complete frame is buffered in local packet 
buffer memory.
By setting when bit 28 is set in the network configuration register, the Inter Packet Gap (IPG) may be stretched beyond 96 
bits depending on the length of the previously transmitted frame and the value written to the IPG_STRETCH register. The 
least significant 8 bits of the IPG_STRETCH register multiply the previous frame length (including preamble) the next 
significant 8 bits (+1 so as not to get a divide by zero) divide the frame length to generate the IPG. IPG stretch only works 
in full-duplex mode and when bit 28 is set in the network configuration register. The IPG_STRETCH register cannot be 
used to shrink the IPG below 96 bits.
If the back pressure bit is set in the network control register or if the half_duplex_flow_control_en input is set in 10/100M 
half-duplex mode, the transmit block transmits 64 bits of data, which can consist of 16 nibbles of 1011 or in bit rate mode 64 
1s, whenever it sees an incoming frame to force a collision. This provides a way of implementing flow control in half-duplex 
mode. Note: This feature is not available in gigabit half-duplex mode.


--- PAGE 91 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
91
6.1.7 Transmit Scheduling Algorithm
When multiple priority queues have been selected, the transmit scheduler is automatically included in the design and is 
responsible for selecting the next queue to be serviced either from the attached DMA or from the external FIFO interface 
when the DMA is not included. There are three scheduling algorithms available to the user and, with some exceptions 
detailed further below, you can select one of the four modes for each queue.
6.1.7.1 IEEE 802.1Qav Support – Credit Based Shaping
A credit-based shaping algorithm is available on the two highest priority active queues and is defined in IEEE 802.1Qav: 
Forwarding and Queuing Enhancements for Time-Sensitive Streams. Traffic shaping is enabled via the CBS (Credit Based 
Shaping) Control register (0x4bc) or the general transmit scheduling control register (offset 0x580). These two registers are 
aliased, so updating one register will automatically update the other. Note: It is permitted to enable CBS only on the second 
highest priority queue and not on the highest, in which case the highest priority queue would always take precedence. Also 
if the highest priority queues are disabled by writing 1 to the disable bit in the transmit queue pointer registers, then IEEE 
802.1Qav (CBS) applies to the two highest enabled queues.
Enabling CBS on a queue will enable a counter which stores the amount of transmit ‘credit’, measured in bytes that a 
particular queue has. A queue may only transmit if it has non-negative credit. If a queue has data to send, but is held off 
from doing as another queue is transmitting, then credit will accumulate in the credit counter at the rate defined in the 
IdleSlope register for that queue. IdleSlope is the rate of change of credit when waiting to transmit and must be less than 
the value of the portTransmitRate. When this queue is transmitting the credit counter is decremented at the rate of 
sendSlope which is defined as the portTransmitRate – IdleSlope. A queue can accumulate negative credit when 
transmitting which will hold off any other transfers from that queue until credit returns to a non-negative value. No transfers 
are halted when a queue’s credit becomes negative, it will accumulate negative credit until the transfer completes.
To ensure that the CBS scheduling is completely accurate a single transmit buffer should be used per Ethernet frame 
(rather than multi-buffer transmit frames).
6.1.7.2 Fixed Priority
Any of the active queues can be selected as fixed priority and this is the default mode of operation for all queues. The 
queue index is used as the priority, where a higher index will have a higher priority than a lower index. The scheduler will 
always attempt to transmit from fixed priority queues with the highest priority. I.e. A fixed priority queue with a high queue 
index will always take precedence over a priority queue with a lower index. 
6.1.7.3 Deficit Weighted Round Robin (DWRR)
Any of the active queues can be selected as DWRR. If DWRR is required, then at least two of the active queues should be 
selected as DWRR. It should not be used in conjunction with Enhanced Transmission Selection (ETS), as both algorithms 
operating together would make little practical sense. A DWRR enabled queue has lower priority than a CBS enabled queue 
or a fixed priority queue with a higher index.
The DWRR algorithm works by scanning all non-empty queues in sequence. Each queue is allocated a ‘deficit counter’ and 
an 8-bit weighting (or quantum) value. The value of the deficit counter is the maximum number of bytes that can be sent at 
the current time.
• If the deficit counter of the scanned queue is greater than the length of the packet waiting for transmission, then the 
packet will be transmitted and the value of the deficit counter is decremented by the packet size. If it is not greater, the 
scheduler will skip to the next DWRR enabled queue. 
• If there is insufficient credit to transmit, the queue is simply skipped. 
• If the queue is empty, the value of the deficit counter is reset to 0. 
• If all queues have insufficient credit then each tx_clk cycle every queue’s deficit counter is incremented by its quantum 
value until a queue’s deficit counter obtains sufficient credit to transmit its first queued frame. The higher the quantum 
value chosen the quicker deficit counter will reach the required value. 


--- PAGE 92 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
92
• If all DWRR queues have the same weighting, then all queues will be granted the same overall bandwidth. The weight-
ing value is stored in four programmable registers starting at offset 0x590. Since the design supports up to 16 priority 
queues, four physical registers are required. Refer to Section 11 Registers on page 146 for further details.
Note: If fixed priority queues are to be used in conjunction with DWRR, the fixed priority queues must be at a higher index 
value than the DWRR queues. A consequence of this is that the enabled DWRR queues shall form a contiguous set of 
queues starting from queue 0.
If CBS is also used in conjunction with DWRR, the DWRR queues will share the remaining bandwidth after the CBS 
allocation has been deducted.
Note: Transmit cut-thru should not be enabled if the transmit scheduler is used.
6.1.7.4 Enhanced Transmission Selection (ETS)
The ETS algorithm is defined in IEEE 802.1Qaz: Enhanced Transmission Selection for Bandwidth Sharing between Traffic 
and allows traffic on specific queues to be bandwidth-limited. Any of the active queues can be selected as ETS. If ETS is 
required, then at least two of the active queues should be selected as ETS. It should not be used in conjunction with DWRR 
as both algorithms operating together would make little practical sense. An ETS-enabled queue has lower priority than a 
CBS-enabled queue or a fixed priority queue with a higher index.
For each ETS-enabled queue, you should program the bandwidth requirement for each queue as a percentage of total 
bandwidth (an 8-bit register is used and the sum of values programmed should not exceed decimal 100). This will be the 
maximum bandwidth to be granted to that queue. The actual scheduling algorithm operates in a round-robin style from 
lowest indexed queues up to the highest indexed queue in sequence. The bandwidth allocation percentage is stored in four 
programmable registers starting at offset 0x590 – these are the same registers used for DWRR. Since the design supports 
up to 16 priority queues, four physical registers are required. Refer to the register descriptions for further details.
If CBS is also used in conjunction with ETS, the sum of the ETS queue percentages should equal the remaining bandwidth 
after the CBS allocation has been deducted.
Note: Transmit cut-thru should not be enabled if the transmit scheduler is used.
6.1.7.5 Enhancement for Scheduled Traffic (EnST)
IEEE 802.1Qbv is a TSN (Time Sensitive Networking) standard for “Enhancements for Scheduled Traffic" and specifies 
“time-aware queue-draining procedures” based on “timing derived from IEEE 802.1AS”. It adds transmission gates to the 
eight priority queues which allow low-priority queues to be shut down at specific times to allow higher-priority queues 
immediate access to the network at specific times.
EnST operation is explained in detail in Section 6.1.16 IEEE 802.1Qbv: Enhancement for Scheduled Traffic (EnST) on 
page 112.
6.1.8 MAC Receive Block
The control bits described in the following subclause are static and should not be updated without disabling the RX path by 
clearing bit[2], enable receive, of the network control register first.
All processing within the MAC receive block is implemented using 16-bit datapath. The MAC receive block checks for valid 
preamble, FCS, alignment and length, presents received frames to the external FIFO interface (to either the DMA module 
or external to the IP core) and stores the frames destination address for use by the address checking block.
When the TBI is selected, 16-bit words are passed directly from the PCS layer to the MAC receiver, except in 10 and 
100Mpbs SGMII modes when 8 bits are read. In 10 and 100Mpbs SGMII modes, the MAC rx_clk runs more slowly than the 
PCS receive datapath clock and the same 8 bits of data is read 5 or 50 times.
If, during frame reception, the frame is found to be too long, a bad frame indication is sent to the external FIFO interface. 
The receiver logic ceases to send data to memory as soon as this condition occurs.


--- PAGE 93 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
93
At end of frame reception, the receive block indicates to the DMA block whether the frame is good or bad. The DMA block 
will recover the current receive buffer if the frame was bad.
Ethernet frames are normally stored in DMA memory or to the external FIFO interface complete with the FCS. Setting the 
FCS remove bit in the network configuration (bit 17) causes frames to be stored without their corresponding FCS. The 
reported frame length field is reduced by four bytes to reflect this operation.
The receive block signals to the register block to increment the alignment, CRC (FCS), short frame, long frame, jabber or 
receive symbol errors when any of these exception conditions occur. 
If bit 26 is set in the network configuration CRC errors is ignored and CRC errored frames are not discarded, the Frame 
Check Sequence Errors statistic register will still be incremented. Additionally, if configured to use the DMA and not 
enabled for jumbo frames mode, then bit[13] of the receiver descriptor word 1 will be updated to indicate the FCS validity 
for the particular frame. This is useful for applications such as EtherCAT whereby individual frames with FCS errors must 
be identified.
Received frames can be checked for length field error by setting the length field error frame discard bit of the network 
configuration register (bit-16). When this bit is set, the receiver compares a frame’s measured length with the length field 
(bytes 13 and 14) extracted from the frame. The frame is discarded if the measured length is shorter. This checking 
procedure is for received frames between 64 bytes and 1518 bytes in length.
Each discarded frame is counted in the 10 bit length field error statistics register. Frames where the length field is greater 
than or equal to 0x0600 hex will not be checked.
When operating in gigabit mode (half duplex), the receiver will discard frames which do not meet the minimal slot time of 
512 bytes. If a burst is detected, the first frame is checked to ensure it meets the slot time, but all subsequent frames of the 
burst are checked to ensure they meet the minimum frame size of 64 bytes.
6.1.9 MAC Filtering Block
The filter block determines which frames should be written to the external FIFO interface and on to the optional DMA.
Whether a frame is passed depends on what is enabled in the network configuration register, the state of the external 
matching pins, the contents of the specific address, type and hash registers, and the frame’s destination address and type 
field.
If bit 25 of the network configuration register is not set, a frame will not be copied to memory if GEM is transmitting in half-
duplex mode at the time a destination address is received.
Ethernet frames are transmitted a byte at a time, least significant bit first. The first six bytes (48 bits) of an Ethernet frame 
make up the destination address. The first bit of the destination address, which is the LSB of the first byte of the frame, is 
the group or individual bit. This is one for multicast addresses and zero for unicast. The all ones address is the broadcast 
address and a special case of multicast.
GEM supports recognition of specific source or destination addresses. The number of specific source or destination 
address filters is configurable and can range from zero to 36. Each specific address filter requires two registers:
• Specific address register bottom − Stores the first four bytes of the compared source or destination address. 
• Specific address register top − Contains the last two bytes of this address, a control bit to select between source or 
destination address filtering and a 6-bit byte mask field to allow the user to mask bytes during the comparison. 
The first filter (Filter 1) is slightly different to all other filters in that there is no byte mask. Instead address comparison 
against individual bits of specific address register 1 can be masked using the unique specific address mask register. The 
addresses stored in all filters can be specific (unicast), group (multicast), local or universal. 
The destination or source address of received frames is compared against the data stored in the specific address registers 
once they have been activated. The addresses are deactivated at reset or when their corresponding specific address 
register bottom is written. They are activated when specific address register top is written. If a receive frame address 
matches an active address, the frame is written to the external FIFO interface and on to DMA memory if used. 


--- PAGE 94 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
94
Frames may be filtered using the type ID field for matching. Four type ID registers exist in the register address space and 
each can be enabled for matching by writing a one to the MSB (bit 31) of the respective register. When a frame is received, 
the matching is implemented as an OR function of the various types of match.
The contents of each type ID registers (when enabled) are compared against the length/type ID of the frame being received 
(e.g. bytes 13 and 14 in non-VLAN and non-SNAP encapsulated frames) and copied to memory if a match is found. The 
encoded type ID match bits (Word 0, Bit 22 and Bit 23) in the receive buffer descriptor status are set indicating which type 
ID register generated the match, if the receive checksum offload is disabled.
The reset state of the type ID registers is zero, hence each is initially disabled.
The following example in Table 38 illustrates the use of the address and type ID match registers for a MAC address of 
21:43:65:87:A9:CB:
Note:* - contains the address of the transmitting device.
The sequence above shows the beginning of an Ethernet frame. Byte order of transmission is from top to bottom as shown. 
For a successful match to specific address 1, the following address matching registers must be set up:
• Specific address 1 bottom (Address 0x088)0x87654321
• Specific address 1 top (Address 0x08C)0x0000CBA9
And for a successful match to the type ID, the following type ID match 1 register must be set up:
• Type ID Match 1 (Address 0x0A8)0x80004321
6.1.9.1 Broadcast Address
Frames with the broadcast address of 0xFFFFFFFFFFFF are stored to memory only if the ‘no broadcast’ bit in the network 
configuration register is set to zero.
6.1.9.2 Hash Addressing
The hash address register is 64-bit long and takes up two locations in the memory map. The least significant bits are stored 
in hash register bottom and the most significant bits in hash register top.
The unicast hash enable and the multicast hash enable bits in the network configuration register enable the reception of 
hash matched frames. The destination address is reduced to a 6-bit index into the 6- bit hash register using the following 
hash function. The hash function is an XOR of every sixth bit of the destination address.
hash_index[05] = da[05] ^ da[11] ^ da[17] ^ da[23] ^ da[29] ^ da[35] ^ da[41] ^ da[47]
Table 38: Address and Type ID Match Register (Example)
Field
Value Checked
Preamble
55
SFD
D5
DA (Octet 0 - LSB)
21
DA (Octet 1)
43
DA (Octet 2)
65
DA (Octet 3)
87
DA (Octet 4)
A9
DA (Octet 5 - MSB)
CB
SA (LSB)
00*
SA
00*
SA
00*
SA
00*
SA 
00*
SA (MSB)
0
Type ID (MSB)
43
Type ID (LSB)
21


--- PAGE 95 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
95
hash_index[04] = da[04] ^ da[10] ^ da[16] ^ da[22] ^ da[28] ^ da[34] ^ da[40] ^ da[46]
hash_index[03] = da[03] ^ da[09] ^ da[15] ^ da[21] ^ da[27] ^ da[33] ^ da[39] ^ da[45]
hash_index[02] = da[02] ^ da[08] ^ da[14] ^ da[20] ^ da[26] ^ da[32] ^ da[38] ^ da[44]
hash_index[01] = da[01] ^ da[07] ^ da[13] ^ da[19] ^ da[25] ^ da[31] ^ da[37] ^ da[43]
hash_index[00] = da[00] ^ da[06] ^ da[12] ^ da[18] ^ da[24] ^ da[30] ^ da[36] ^ da[42]
da[0] represents the least significant bit of the first byte received, that is, the multicast/unicast indicator, and da[47] 
represents the most significant bit of the last byte received.
If the hash index points to a bit that is set in the hash register, then the frame will be matched according to whether the 
frame is multicast or unicast.
A multicast match will be signaled if the multicast hash enable bit is set, da[0] is logic 1 and the hash index points to a bit 
set in the hash register.
A unicast match will be signaled if the unicast hash enable bit is set, da[0] is logic 0 and the hash index points to a bit set in 
the hash register.
To receive all multicast frames, the hash register should be set with all ones and the multicast hash enable bit should be set 
in the network configuration register.
6.1.9.3 External Address Matching
In applications where the internal address matching circuitry of GEM is not sufficient, an external address matching 
interface is provided. Matches can be performed on source address, destination address, type or VLAN ID. Each field is 
provided as an output (ext_sa, ext_da, ext_type and ext_vid output pins) with a validating strobe signal (ext_sa_stb, 
ext_da_stb, ext_type_stb and ext_vid_stb output pins). The strobes for each field are asserted high for one cycle at the 
point the field becomes valid within the frame reception.
IP source and destination addresses along with UDP/TCP port numbers are also available for external address matching. 
These fields are provided as the ext_ip_sa, ext_ip_da, ext_source_port  and ext_dest_port outputs, and are validated by 
the ext_ip_sa_stb, ext_ip_da_stb, ext_sp_stb and ext_dp_stb outputs.
The external filter interface is enabled by setting bit 9 in the network configuration register.
External logic connected to the filter interface should return the ext_match1, ext_match2, ext_match3, or ext_match4 
inputs when a match is found. Any one of the four match inputs can indicate a filter match as the inputs are logically ORed 
within the MAC. 
The time at which the output strobes for the various fields are valid is fixed relative to the time of frame reception and 
depends on the type of frame being decoded. Destination address, source address, and VLAN ID are always fixed relative 
to the start of the frame. Type ID and the IP address, however, depend on whether the frame has a VLAN tag and/or a valid 
SNAP encapsulation.
The number of rx_clk cycles available to make the comparison is design specific, depending on the parameterizable depth 
of the MAC receive pipeline. The ‘gem_rx_pipeline_delay define in gem_gxl_defs.v defines the depth of the receive 
pipeline. A decision as to whether the frame should be stored to memory is made when the destination address reaches 
the end of the pipeline.
Timings from each strobe becoming valid until the internal match takes place are shown below for the default receive 
pipeline of ten. 
These timings also demonstrate the worst case of TBI gigabit mode, where 16 bits of data are processed every rx_clk 
cycle. For demonstration (see Table 39), the frame received has a VLAN tag. The type ID field, therefore, presented to the 
external filter interface is delayed until after the VLAN ID is presented so that the real type ID field is captured.
Table 39: External Address Match Timing
Strobe Signal
No. of rx_clk for a Match
ext_da_stb (destination address)
7


--- PAGE 96 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
96
The interface assumes the connecting signals are synchronous to rx_clk as shown Figure 17.
Figure 17: External Address Matching Timing
The depth of the default receive pipeline is insufficient for external matching of the extracted IP addresses. To cope with 
both VLAN and SNAP frames, the pipeline must be at least 25 deep when matching on the extracted IP destination 
address. SNAP and IP frames are only identified if the receive checksum offload is enable in the network configuration 
register.
6.1.9.4 Copy All Frames (or Promiscuous Mode)
If the copy all frames bit is set in the network configuration register, then all frames (except those that are too long, too 
short, have FCS errors or have rx_er asserted during reception) will be copied to memory. Frames with FCS errors will be 
copied if bit 26 is set in the network configuration register.
6.1.9.5 Disable Copy of Pause Frames
Pause frames can be prevented from being written to memory by setting the disable copying of pause frames control bit 23 
in the network configuration register. When set, pause frames are not copied to memory regardless of the copy all frames 
bit, whether a hash match is found, a type ID match is identified, or a destination address match is found.
6.1.9.6 VLAN Support
ext_sa_stb (source address)
4
ext_type_stb (type field)
1
ext_vid_stb (VLAN ID)
2
Table 39: External Address Match Timing (Continued)
Strobe Signal
No. of rx_clk for a Match
rx_clk
ext_da_stb
ext_da[47:0]
ext_sa_stb
ext_sa[47:0]
ext_type_stb
ext_type[15:0]
Valid
Valid
Valid
ext_vid_stb
ext_vid[15:0]
Valid
2 clks
4 clks
7 clks
ext_match must be 
seen before here for 
copying to memory
1 clk


--- PAGE 97 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
97
Table 40 depicts an Ethernet encoded 802.1Q VLAN tag.
The VLAN tag is inserted at the 13th byte of the frame, adding an extra four bytes to the frame. To support these extra four 
bytes, GEM can accept frame lengths up to 1536 bytes by setting bit 8 in the network configuration register.
If the VID (VLAN identifier) is null (0x000), this indicates a priority-tagged frame.
The following bits in the receive buffer descriptor status word give information about VLAN tagged frames:
• Bit 21 set if receive frame is VLAN tagged (i.e. type id of 0x8100).
• Bit 20 set if receive frame is priority tagged (i.e. type id of 0x8100 and null VID). (If bit 20 is set bit 21 will be set also.).
• Bit 19, 18 and 17 set to priority if bit 21 is set.
• Bit 16 set to CFI if bit 21 is set.
GEM can be configured to reject all frames except VLAN tagged frames by setting the discard non-VLAN frames bit in the 
network configuration register.
6.1.9.7 Wake-on-LAN Support
The receive block supports Wake on LAN by detecting the following events on incoming receive frames:
• Magic packet
• ARP request to the device IP address
• Specific address 1 filter match
• Multicast hash filter match 
If one of these events occurs, Wake-on-LAN detection is indicated by asserting the wol output pin for 64 rx_clk cycles. 
These events can be individually enabled through bits[19:16] of the Wake on LAN register. Also, for Wake-on-LAN 
detection to occur receive enable must be set in the network control register, however a receive buffer does not have to be 
available. In addition to the wol output pin, an optional wol interrupt is generated for software purposes. If only the MAC 
receive clock is running at the time of the Wake-on-LAN event (and not the APB clock), the wol interrupt will not occur.
wol assertion due to ARP request, specific address 1 or multicast filter events will occur even if the frame is errored. For 
magic packet events, the frame must be correctly formed and error free.
A magic packet event is detected if all of the following are true:
• Magic packet events are enabled through bit 16 of the Wake-on-LAN register
• The frame's destination address matches specific address 1
• The frame is correctly formed with no errors
• The frame contains at least 6 bytes of 0xFF for synchronization
• There are 16 repetitions of the contents of specific address 1 register immediately following the synchronization
An ARP request event is detected if all of the following are true:
• ARP request events are enabled through bit 17 of the Wake-on-LAN register
• Broadcasts are allowed by bit 5 in the network configuration register
• The frame has a broadcast destination address (bytes 1 to 6)
• The frame has a typeID field of 0x0806 (bytes 13 and 14)
• The frame has an ARP operation field of 0x0001 (bytes 21 and 22)
Table 40: VLAN Tag
TPID (Tag Protocol Identifier) 16 Bits
TCI (Tag Control Information) 16 Bits
0x8100
First 3 bits priority, then CFI bit, last 12 bits VID


--- PAGE 98 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
98
• The least significant 16 bits of the frame's ARP target protocol address (bytes 41 and 42) match the value programmed 
in bits[15:0] of the Wake-on-LAN register
The decoding of the ARP fields adjusts automatically if a VLAN tag is detected within the frame. The reserved value of 
0x0000 for the Wake-on-LAN target address value will not cause an ARP request event, even if matched by the frame.
A specific address 1 filter match event will occur if all of the following are true:
• Specific address 1 events are enabled through bit 18 of the Wake on LAN register
• The frame's destination address matches the value programmed in the specific address 1 registers
A multicast filter match event will occur if all of the following are true:
• Multicast hash events are enabled through bit 19 of the Wake on LAN register
• Multicast hash filtering is enabled through bit 6 of the network configuration register
• The frame destination address matches against the multicast hash filter
• The frame destination address is not a broadcast
6.1.9.8 Frame Screening
Frames matched by the frame filtering functionality can undergo further screening and be sent to individual receive queues. 
This screening functionality has the ability to inspect deep into a receive frame and from release 1p11 has the ability to 
discard frames in addition to directing them to a specified receive queue.
For configurations using the FIFO interface, rx_w_queue[3:0] indicates the priority queue selected by the screener 
registers.
For configurations using the DMA interface, there is an independent set of receive buffers for each queue. Every received 
packet will pass through a programmable screening algorithm which will allocate to that frame a particular queue to route it 
to. The user interface to the screeners is via two banks of programmable registers, screener type 1 match registers and 
screener type 2 match registers.
6.1.9.8.1 Screener Type 1 and Type 2 Match Registers
Screener type 1 match registers allow the user to route received frames based on particular IP and UDP fields extracted 
from the received frames. Specifically, these fields are DS (Differentiated Services field of IPv4 frames), TC (Traffic class 
field of IPv6 frames), and/or the UDP destination port. These fields are compared against the values stored in each of the 
screener type 1 match registers. If the result of this comparison is positive, then the received frame is routed to the priority 
queue specified in that screener type 1 match register. The number of type 1 screeners is determined by a define in the 
GEM defines file. Up to 16 screener type 1 registers are allocated address space in the default GEM address map, 
although this could be increased if necessary by redistributing other GEM registers. For further programming details, refer 
to the type 1 screening register descriptions in Section 11  Registers.
Screener type 2 match registers operate independently of screener type 1 match registers and offer additional match 
capabilities, extending the capabilities into vendor-specific protocols. The type 2 screening allows a screen to be configured 
that is the combination of all or any of the following comparisons:
1. An Enabled VLAN Priority. A VLAN Priority match will be performed if the VLAN priority enable is set. The extracted 
priority field in the VLAN header is compared against 3 bits within the screener type 2 register itself. 
2. An Enabled EtherType. The ethertype field inside the screener type 2 register maps to one of 8 ethertype match regis-
ters. The extracted ethertype is compared against the ethertype register designated by this ethertype field. The number 
of ethertype registers is configurable (up to 8) via the GEM defines file.
3. An Enabled Field Compare A 
4. An Enabled Field Compare B
5. An Enabled Field Compare C
Compare A, B, and C fields of the screener type 2 match register are pointers to a pool of up to 32 compare registers. If 
enabled, the compare is true if the data at the OFFSET into the frame, ANDed with the MASK Value if the mask is enabled, 
is equal to the COMPARE Value. Either a 16-bit comparison or a 32-bit comparison is done. This selection is made via a 
control bit in the associated compare word1:


--- PAGE 99 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
99
• If a 16-bit comparison is selected, then a 16-bit mask is also available to you for selecting which bits should be com-
pared
• If the 32-bit compare option is selected, then no mask is available
The byte at the OFFSET number of bytes from the index start is compared through bits 7:0 of the configured VALUE. The 
byte at the OFFSET number of bytes + 1 from the index start is compared through bits 15:8 of the configured VALUE and 
so on. The OFFSET can be configured to be from 0 to 127 bytes from either the start of the frame, the byte following the 
ethertype field, the byte following the end of the IP header (IPv4 or IPv6) or the byte following the end of the TCP/UDP 
header. Note: The logic to decode the IP header or the TCP/UDP header is reused from the TCP/UDP/IP checksum offload 
logic and therefore has the same restrictions on use (the main limitation is that IP fragmentation is not supported). For 
further details, refer to Section 6.1.10 Checksum Offload for IP, TCP, and UDP on page 100. The Compare Register field 
points to a single pool of 32 compare Registers. Compare A, Compare B, and Compare C use a common set of compare 
registers. The number of compare registers is configurable (up to 32) via the in gem_gxl_defs.v file.
Note: Compare A, B and C together allow matching against an arbitrary 48 bits of data and so can be used to match 
against a MAC address.
All enabled comparisons are ANDed together to form the overall type 2 screener match. 
For programming details, refer to the type 2 screening register descriptions in Section 11  Registers.
The number of type 2 screeners is determined by a define in the in gem_gxl_defs.v file. Up to 16 screener type 2 match 
registers are allocated address space in the default GEM address map, although this could be increased if necessary by 
redistributing other GEM registers. 
The following summarizes the available configurations that the GEM core can support with regards to priority queuing:
• There can be between one and 16 priority queues configured
• When the number of priority queues is greater than 1, the user has the option of including up to 16 type 1 screeners, 
which allow the user to select the queue a receive packet will be routed to based on its UDP and/or TOS/TC fields
• When the number of priority queues is greater than 1, the user has the option of including up to 16 type 2 screeners, 
which allow the user to select the queue a receive packet will be routed to based on its VLAN, ethertype compare, or 
user-programmed compare fields
• When the number of type 2 screeners defined is greater than 0, the user has the option of including from zero up to 8 
ethertype compare registers
• When the number of type 2 screeners defined is greater than 0, the user has the option of including from zero up to 32 
user programmable field compare registers
Each screener register is programmable via the APB interface. Although this is not recommended, it is possible that more 
than one screener register will be programmed to match against a single frame. If this happens there are 2 cases to 
consider:
1. If a received frame matches against multiple screeners of the same type, then the frame will route to the queue mapped 
by the screener located at the lowest numeric APB address. E.g. if screener type 2 #0 and screener type 2 #1 both 
match, then the frame will route to the queue identified in bits [3:0] of the screener type 2 #0 register. 
2. If a received frame matches against a type 2 screener and a type 1 screener, then the type 1 screener will take prece-
dence
When a screener is matched, the received frame will be routed to a queue defined inside bits 3:0 of the screener register. 
Unmatched frames are routed to queue 0.
When the priority queuing feature is enabled, the number of interrupt outputs from the GEM core is increased to match the 
number of supported queues. The number of interrupt status registers are increased by the same number. Only DMA 
related events are reported using the individual interrupt outputs, as GEM can relate these events to specific queues. All 
other events generated within GEM are reported in the interrupt associated with the lowest priority queue. For the lowest 
priority queue (or the only queue when only 1 queue is selected), the interrupt status register is located at address 0x24. 
For all other queues, the interrupt status register is located at sequential addresses starting at address 0x400.


--- PAGE 100 ---

IP Rev: R1p12 - Doc Rev: 1.0   Cadence IP for Gigabit Ethernet MAC for Automotive (IP7014A) User Guide
November 6, 2017
Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
Cadence Confidential
100
6.1.10 Checksum Offload for IP, TCP, and UDP
GEM can be programmed to perform IP, TCP, and UDP checksum offloading in both the receive and transmit direction 
which is enabled by setting: 
• Bit 24 in the network configuration register for receive and
• Bit 11 in the DMA configuration register for transmit.
IPv4 packets contain a 16-bit checksum field, which is the 16-bit 1’s complement of the 1’s complement sum of all 16-bit 
words in the header. TCP and UDP packets contain a 16-bit checksum field, which is the 16-bit 1’s complement of the 1’s 
complement sum of all 16-bit words in the header, the data and a conceptual IP pseudo header.
To calculate these checksums in software requires each byte of the packet to be processed. For TCP and UDP, this can 
use a large amount of processing power. Offloading the checksum calculation to hardware can result in significant 
performance improvements.
For IP, TCP, or UDP checksum offload to be useful, the operating system containing the protocol stack must be aware that 
this offload is available so that it can make use of the fact that the hardware can either generate or verify the checksum.
6.1.10.1 Receiver Checksum Offload
When receive checksum offloading is enabled in GEM, the IPv4 header checksum is checked as per RFC 791, where the 
packet meets the following criteria:
• If present, the VLAN header must be four octets long and the CFI bit must not be set. (Also for receive one stacked 
VLAN is supported.)
• Encapsulation must be RFC 894 Ethernet Type Encoding or RFC 1042 SNAP Encoding or PPPoE Encoding
• IPv4 packet
• IP header is of a valid length
• IP options are supported
GEM also checks the TCP checksum as per RFC 793, or the UDP checksum as per RFC 768, if the following criteria are 
met:
• IPv4 or IPv6 packet
• IP options and all IPv6 extension headers (i.e. hop-by-hop, routing and destination) are supported (except for fragmen-
tation headers) 
• Good IP header checksum (if IPv4)
• IP fragmentation is not supported (If a packet is fragmented, then the checksum will not be checked)
• Reserved bit must not be set in the IPv4 header flags field
• TCP or UDP packet
When an IP, TCP, or UDP frame is received, the receive buffer descriptor gives an indication if GEM was able to verify the 
checksums. There is also an indication if the frame had SNAP encapsulation. These indication bits will replace the type ID 
match indication bits when the receive checksum offload is enabled. For details of these indication bits, please refer to the 
table Table 26 Receive Buffer Descriptor Entry on page 62.
If any of the checksums are verified incorrect by GEM, the packet is discarded and the appropriate statistics counter 
incremented.
6.1.10.2 Transmitter Checksum Offload
The transmitter checksum offload is only available if GEM is configured to use the DMA in packet buffer mode and full store 
and forward mode is enabled. This is because the complete frame to be transmitted must be read into the packet buffer 
memory before the checksum can be calculated and written back into the headers at the beginning of the frame.
